Biography of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 
(1859-1930)
Most  remembered  as  the  creator  of  the  
fictional  detective  “Sherlock  Holmes,”  
Sir  Arthur  Conan  Doyle  hoped  that  he  
would  be  most  remembered  for  his  books  and  
lectures on life after death. He considered his two-
volume  1926  book,  
The  History  of  Spiritualism,
  as  
his  most  important  contribution  to  mankind.    Af-
ter   joining   the   Society   for   Psychical   Research   
(SPR)  in  1894  and  investigating  many  cases  of  
mediumship,    Doyle  moved  from  materialist  and  
skeptic to believer to ardent Spiritualist and prop-
agandist, the latter term us
ed in its original sense 
–  one  who  promotes  a  cause  with  great  zeal.    He  
devoted  the  better  part  of  the  last  decade  of  his  
life  to  attempting  to  convince  the  world  that  con-
sciousness survives physical death. 
“From  the  moment  that  I  had  understood  
the  overwhelming  importance  of  this  subject  and  
realized  how  utterly  it  must  change  and  chasten  
the whole thought of the world when it is whole-
heartedly  accepted,  I  felt  ...  that  all  other  work  
which  I  had  ever  done,  
or  could  ever  do,  was  
nothing  compared  to  this,”  he  explained  his  mis-
sion.
1
Born in Edinburgh, Scotland of Irish Cath-
olic parents, Doyle attended Roman Catholic pub-
lic schools, graduated from Stonyhurst College in 
Lancashire, then spent a year studying in Germa-
ny  before  returning  to  Scotland  and  earning  his  
medical   degree   from   Edinburgh   University   in   
1881.  He practiced medicine, including service as 
senior  physician  of  the  South  African  field  hospi-
tal  during  the  Boer  War,  until  1890,  when  he  de-
cided to become a full-time author.  His first Sher-
lock Holmes story was published three years ear-
lier,  in  1887,  and  was  an  immediate  success.  His  
knighthood  in  1902  was  a  result  of  his  book  
The 
Great  Boer  War
  in  which  he  defended  his  home-
land’s involvement in the war. 
Doyle’s  introduction  to  psychic  phenome-
na  was  at  the  home  of  one  of  his  patients,  when  
he  observed  table  turning  séances  and  apports.    
This  experience  prompted  him  to  join  the  SPR.      
He  carried  out  a  number  of  experiments  with  a  
Mrs.  Bell  and  satisfied  himself  that  telepathy  was  
a fact.  However, he remained a skeptic relative to 
the survival of consciousness issue.  It was report-
ed that when he and Professor Oliver Lodge were 
knighted  in  1902,  they  engaged  in  a  debate  over  
psychic  phenomena  and  survival,  Doyle  appar-
ently  taking  a  non-survival
  position.    Frederic  W.  
H.  Myers’  1903  book  
Human  Personality  and  Its  
Survival of Bodily Death
 helped move him into the 
survival  camp  and  eventually  to  become  a  dedi-
cated Spiritualist. 
  Many  of  his  critics  assume  that  Doyle  
converted  to  Spiritualism  after  the  World  War  I  
death of his son Kingsley on October 28, 1918, but 
the record is clear that he declared his belief in life 
M 
www.aeces.info                                                                                                                                  
Page 2 of 4 
after death two years earlier, in an article in 
Light
magazine  dated  October  21,  1916.  He  began  lec-
turing  on  psychic  phenomena  in  1917  and  was  
about  to  go  on  the  platform  at  Nottingham  to  
speak  on  Spiritualism  when  he  received  a  tele-
gram  informing  him  of  Kingsley’s  death.    More-
over,  his  book  
The  New  Revelation
  was  published  
in June 1918.  
The Vital Message
 was published the 
following  year.  “Anybody  who  has  read  this  rec-
ord will not need to be convinced that he did not 
go   blindfolded   into   Spiritualism,”   wrote   John   
Dickson  Carr,  one  of  his  biographers.    “He  had  
studied for nearly thirty years before coming to a 
judgment.    Cruel  bereavement  he  certainly  had  
suffered,  though  not  the  greatest  bereavement;  
and  deeply  he  felt  the  agony  of  the  world  in  cha-
os.”
2
In  a  November  16,  1911,  letter  to  his  good  
friend  Samuel  Harper,  Conan  Doyle  wrote  that  
the hell-fire of Catholicism with which he was in-
doctrinated   during   his   youth   significantly   im-
pacted him and influenced his leaving the Catho-
lic  faith.    “Even  my  choice  of  philosophy  if  you  
can’t  call  spiritualism  a  religion,  may  have  been  
dictated  by  the  circumstances  of  my  childhood,”  
he continued.  “We may suffer the derision of our 
fellows    for    our    beliefs,    but    we    enjoy    the    
knowledge  that  the  spirit  is  free  to  return,  even  
across  the  valley  of  death.  ...  But  if  Catholicism  
would  not  do,  still  I  could  not  live  without  reli-
gion.    It  is  too  much  a  requirement  of  the  Celtic  
nature,  I  guess.  And  after  years  of  searching  and  
having lost so much with the deaths of so many I 
dearly  love,  I  had  to  find  a  belief  which  would  
meet  my  needs.    That  the  spirits  of  the  dead  live  
on and can communicate with us may not be eve-
rything.    But  it  is  a  beginning  and  I’m  perfectly  
willing to devote my life and all my wealth to dis-
covering the rest.”
3
Doyle  said  that  World  War  I  made  him  
view the whole subject with even greater earnest-
ness.    “In  the  presence  of  an  agonized  world,  
hearing  every  day  of  the  de
aths  of  the  flower  of  
our  race  in  the  first  promise  of  their  unfulfilled  
youth,  seeing  around  one  the  wives  and  mothers  
who  had  no  clear  conception  whither  their  loved  
ones had gone, I suddenly seemed to see that this 
subject  with  which  I  had  so  long  dallied  was  not  
merely  the  study  of  a  force  outside  the  rules  of  
science  but  that  it  was  really  something  tremen-
dous,  a  breaking  down  of  the  walls  between  two  
worlds,  a  direct  undeniable  message  from  be-
yond,  a  call  of  hope  and  guidance  for  the  human  
race at the time of its deepest affliction.”
4
It  is  not  clear  when  the  sitting  with  a  Mr.  
Southey  took  place,  but  it  apparently  influenced  
him more than anything else.  “For two hours my 
wife and I had sat within listening to the whisper-
ing voices of the dead, voices which are so full of 
earnest  life,  and  of  desperate  endeavors  to  pierce  
the barrier of our dull sense,” Conan Doyle wrote. 
“They had quivered and wavered around us, giv-
ing  us  pet  names,  sweet  sacred  things,  the  inti-
mate  talk  of  olden  time.    Graceful  lights,  signs  of  
spirit power had hovered over us in the darkness.  
It  was  a  different  and  wonderful  world.    Now  
with those voices still haunting our memories we 
had slipped out into the material world – a world 
of  glaring  iron-works  and  of  twinkling  cottage  
windows.  As I looked down on it all I grasped 
my wife’s hand in the darkness and I cried aloud, 
‘My  God,  if  they  only  knew  –  if  they  could  only  
know!’”
5
  It was this experience, he believed, that 
launched  his  crusade,  including  voyages  to  Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United 
States to lecture on Spiritualism. 
During  his  travels,  
Doyle  sat  with  many  
famous  mediums,  including  Etta  Wriedt,  Minnie  
Soule   (“Mrs.   Chenoweth”),   George   Valiantine,   
Joseph  Jonson,  Anna  Wickland,  Mina  Crandon,  
and Marthe Beraud (“Eva C.”).  In his home coun-
try,  he  sat  with  Estelle  Roberts,  Eileen  Garrett,  
Evan Powell, Annie Brittain, John Sloan, Kathleen 
Goligher,  and  William  Hope,  to  name  just  a  few.    
“With  so  much  practical  work  behind  me,”  he  
wrote, “the reader can imagine my feelings when 
in  a  public  debate  upon  the  subject  with  Dr.  Hal-
dane  of  Cambridge  my  distinguished  opponent  
www.aeces.info                                                                                                                                  
Page 3 of 4 
said, ‘I once knew a medium.’ In my reply I asked 
him  what  he  would  think  of  me  if  I  contradicted  
him  upon  some  point  of  chemistry,  and  said,  ‘I  
have once been in a laboratory.’”
6
And  yet,  unfortunately,  Doyle  is  most  re-
membered in the psychical research arena for  be-
ing  duped  in  the  case  of  the  Cottingley  Fairies,  
which  involved  some  photographs  taken  by  two  
young  girls  supposedly  showing  fairies  prancing  
around   in   their   Cottingley,   Yorkshire,   garden.      
Doyle concluded that the fairies were real and his 
1921  book  
The  Coming  of  the  Fairies
,  in  which  he  
discussed the existence of 
fairies and nature  spir-
its, followed. This endorsement of fairies branded 
Conan Doyle as being totally credulous and is of-
ten  cited  by  debunkers  and  skeptics  to  discredit  
all   psychic   phenomena   observed   not   only   by   
Doyle  but  by  others.    Nearly  all  of  his  biog-
raphers, obviously fans of Sherlock Holmes, seem 
to want to apologize for their hero having strayed 
into  the  occult  world,  charging  it  to  his  age  (55  
when  he  began  his  crusade)  or,  they  surmise,  his  
grief  resulting  from  the  death  of  his  son,  brother,  
and two brothers-in-law, all during the war years, 
made  him  escape  into  unrea
lity.      It  is  ironical,  
perhaps paradoxical, that the creator of a shrewd, 
rational  detective  should  have  gone  down  in  his-
tory as something of an absent-minded professor.   
Doyle’s  interest  in  fairies  was  expressed  a  
decade  before  the  Cottingley  Fairies  fiasco.  “I  am  
aware that much has been made of my interest in 
faeries, leprechauns, etc. just as I am aware this is 
all  attributed  to  my  Irish  background,  the  world  
assuming that the Irishman expects to find a faery 
under every bush,” he wrote in a letter to Samuel 
Harper on November 30, 1911.
7
  But Conan Doyle 
saw  his  interest  in  fairies  as  incidental  to  and  in-
dependent  of  the  life  after  death  issue.    While  
there is no scientific evidence of such nature spir-
its  or  elementals,  as  they  are  sometimes  called,  a  
number  of  people  with  clairvoyant  ability  have  
reported seeing such beings. 
Sir  Arthur’s  wife,  Jean,  developed  as  an  
automatic   writing   medium.   “Our   first   written   
communications,  dating  from  early  in  1921,  were  
from  relations  and  friends  who  had  passed  be-
yond  the  border,”  he  wrote.  “Occasionally  also  
we  had  visits  from  strangers  who  were  attracted  
by what they called ‘the light’ – a common other-
world  description  of  the  psychic  atmosphere  of  a  
séance.”
8
   He went on to say that on December 
10, 1922, he heard from Pheneas, his guide, for the 
first  time.    Pheneas  then  became  Lady  Doyle’s  
primary   control   and   in   April   1924   her   medi-
umship changed to semi-trance inspirational talk-
ing.  Conan Doyle’s 1927 book, 
Pheneas Speaks
, set 
forth   much   information,   as   communicated   by   
Pheneas,  about  the  afterlife  environment.    “For  
the  sake  of  unborn  generations  a  new  right  un-
derstanding of God, the great, tender Father of all 
must be given to humanity, and the old theologi-
cal  misconceptions  of  God  as  a  Judge  must  be  
swept away,” Pheneas communicated on October 
10,  1926.    “Love,  not  fear,  must  reign  in  each  
heart.  Humanity must kn
ow the kind of existence 
they  will  lead  in  the  lower  greyer  spheres  if  their  
lives   are   selfish   and   evil   in   the   earth   plane.      
Knowledge  of  where  a  man’s  actions  are  leading  
him  will  help  and  inspire  him  to  live  at  his  high-
est and what to avoid. The knowledge of the real 
and human happiness in the higher worlds ahead 
will  give  a  man  courage  in  facing  sorrows  and  
difficulties on this earth.”
9
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  his  interest  in  psy-
chic  matters  cost  him  many  friends  and  also  cost  
him  much  money,  Doyle  remained  dedicated  to  
his  mission.    “I  cannot  do  anything  else,”  he  told  
his wife.  “All my life has led up to this.  It is the 
greatest thing in the world.”
10
After his death, many mediums, including 
Lady   Conan   Doyle,   began   receiving   messages   
from  him.  Perhaps  the  most  detailed  are  those  
that  came  through  the  London  medium  Grace  
Cooke,  beginning  in  May  1931.      “I  have  passed  
through  what  you  know  as  the  astral  life,  and  
have now been cleared from the conditions which 
were  hampering  my  work,”  he  communicated  
through  Cooke.    “To  clear  a  soul  of  the  astral  vi-
www.aeces.info                                                                                                                                  
Page 4 of 4 
brations  is  not  altogether  an  easy  matter;  but  do  
not  be  misguided  with  regard  to  this  state;  it  is  a  
necessary  evil.    To  be  freed  from  these  astral  ties  
does  not  sever  a  man  from  those  he  loves,  but  it  
sets free his spirit and allows him to enter into the 
full realization of his own nature.”
11
   He went on 
to  say  that  he  now  recognized  certain  things  in  
which he was mistaken. 
“No  man  can  have  the  entire  truth,”  the  
discarnate  Doyle  continued.    “In  some  respects  I  
was  misled.    Before  my  passing  I  had  had  some  
suspicions  regarding  astral  memories,  and  was  
aware  that  certain  spiritualistic  phenomena  were  
attributable  to  these  memories.    But  I  did  not  be-
lieve that 
all
 such communications arose from this 
cause;  nor  do  they!    I  tell  you  definitely  that  it  is  
possible  for  the  human  spirit,  which  is  the  real  
man  –  if  that  man  has  a  definite  mission  to  per-
form  for  the  good  of  humanity  –  to  come  back  to  
execute  it  and  so  help  forward  the  evolution  of  
the race.”
12
Doyle   further   explained   that   when   he   
wanted  to  communicate  with  those  on  the  earth  
plane  he  had  to  attune  himself  to  the  degree  of  
mental  life  possessed  by  those  whom  he  contact-
ed.  “Thus,  sometimes  I  
speak  from  the  astral  
plane,  sometimes  from  th
e  planes  above;  but  I  
have  always  to  attune  my  vibration  to  the  condi-
tion provided...I now come back to reveal a finer 
life,  a  nobler  path  than  had  ever  dawned  on  my  
earthly  conception.    All  mu
st  be  put  right.    Man  
must  be  taught  the  truth  concerning  his  life  after  
death.”
13

